- [Instructor] When beginning to iterate
through collections, most Java developers
encounter the concurrent modification exception.
It's almost like a rite of passage.
So I'm going to show you how to avoid that.
In our application, I've created a collection of rooms.
Then we have some innocent looking code
that iterates through the rooms using a for-each loop.
Inside of the loop's body,
we check to see if a room is pet friendly.
Pet friendly is a new Boolean field
that I've added to the room type and added accessors for.
If the room is pet friendly,
we're going to attempt to remove it
from the collection of rooms.
Now let's go ahead and see what happens
when we execute this code.
Yup, there it is, the concurrent modification exception.
So let's talk a little bit about why that occurred.
The concurrent modification exception is thrown
when the underlying collection is modified
while we're iterating through it.
It can be triggered if we attempt to add, remove,
or in general change the collection inside of a loop.
This exception protects the collection from being changed
by another thread while we're iterating through it.
However, the exception is still thrown
for single-threaded code like ours.
Changes to a collection during iteration
can have unexpected results at runtime,
so that's difficult to troubleshoot.
The iterator attempts to protect us from that
by failing fast.
But what if we still need to remove an element
from a collection that we're iterating?
Let's take a look at one option.
We can collect the elements
we'd like to remove in a new collection.
So what I'm going to do is create a new collection
outside of the for-each loop where we're not iterating.
So here we have a collection of type room
that's backed by an array list.
Inside of the body of our for loop,
I can go ahead and switch up line 25.
And instead of attempting to remove
from the original collection, I'm just going to add the room
to the new collection that we created
that isn't part of the iteration.
Now outside of the for-each loop where we're not iterating,
what I can do is take our original collection of rooms
and I can invoke the removeAll method on the collection.
You'll recall this is a bulk operation
that's provided through the collection interface.
And if we just pass in the collection of rooms
that we gathered during the iteration
in a separate collection,
we can then remove them all from the original collection.
Okay, so let's go ahead and we can see this in action
and you'll notice that the rooms Oxford and Victoria
were removed from our collection.
Those were the pet-friendly rooms. Excellent.
Now, there's another way that we can do this
using an iterator, so let's take a look at that.
So first, let's get an iterator for our rooms collection.
We can do that by invoking the iterator method on it.
Okay, so now that we have our iterator,
I'm going to create a while loop
that uses the iterator to traverse the collection.
This is the pattern that we saw before.
And once again, my IDE attempts to perform the cast,
so I'm going to remove that.
And now inside of our while loop's body,
I can just go ahead and grab this conditional statement.
So I'll just cut that and paste it here.
And then I'm going to go ahead
and clean up this code that use the for-each loop.
Now, when we're doing the iteration using the iterator,
we can just replace line 26
with a call to the iterator's remove method.
And this will allow us to safely remove an element
from a collection that we're iterating
without throwing the concurrent modification exception.
All right, okay, so let's go ahead and we'll save this code
and then I'll execute it and you'll notice once again,
we've removed the pet-friendly rooms.
Collections often provide several ways
to achieve the same outcome,
but sometimes that can get us into trouble
like when we modify a collection that we're iterating.
So stick to the methods that I showed you
or better yet use a stream.
I'll show you that next.